Arriving_Germany.md, before:

# Arriving Germany

There is an exact sequence of steps that you need to take before you can do anything in Germany.

## Table Of Contents 
- [Entering Germany](#entering-germany)
- Get an apartment to live in
  - Making Contact
    - Contacting the landlords for individual apartments
    - Contacting the main tenant (Hauptmieter/*-in) for shared apartements
  - Apartment view (Besichtigungstermin)
  - Apartment control and signing the rental contract.
  - Alternatives

## Entering Germany ℹ️

Depending on whether you're eligible for 90 days of Schengen Visa or not, you'll need to get a visa to enter Germany. Every country is different in this matter, so I'll not cover how you'd get a permit to enter Germany.

## Get an apartment to live in ℹ️

> **Warning** Looking for an apartment is difficult, espcially when you don't speak the language. In some of the platforms for apartment-searching there are scammers of which trying to ask you for money transfers in advance without showing you the room saying that they're currently living abroad or something like that. DO NOT transfer money to these people, these are most likely scammers that you'd never be able to get that money back again.

Looking for an apartment is quite cumbersome in Germany especially in big major cities (Berlin, Cologne, Frankfurt, Hamburg, Munich), as the population is outgrowing the capacity. It should depend on your reason to moving into Germany, but if you're trying to look for a new job or trying to become a university student, you'll most likely have to move again for your job or for your studies. So my best recommendation is that you look for an accomodation where you consider temporary. There are cities which has some decent living price, yet still close to the big cities, so do your research to find a city that you want to live temporarily and move to the city once you've need. [Here's](https://www.studying-in-germany.org/cost-of-living-in-germany/) a site (2022) where you can have a grasp of the living costs in big Germany cities.

There are some web-platforms to find an accomodation.

1. [wg-gesucht.de](https://www.wg-gesucht.de/) : You can find shared apartments here. It can be both short or long term, students usually use this platform to find a new place to live in the city they're studying or in case they're doing internship in other cities. 
1. [immobilienscout24.de](https://www.immobilienscout24.de/) : A platform where apartments owned by companies or individual landlords are posted. Most popular option in Germany
1. [immowelt.de](https://www.immowelt.de/): Similar as immobilientscout24, but a different web site.
1. [ebay-kleinanzeigen](https://www.kleinanzeigen.de/): ebay-kleinanzeigen is a like a second-hand online shop where each individual sells their used products. You can also look for apartments under `Wohnung`.
1. some facebook groups to share local rents

Sadly, most of the people in these platforms only speak German, so if you don't have anybody to help, use an online translator to translate.

### Making contact

#### Contacting the landlords for individual apartments

This section is for when you're looking for apartments for your own use such as in immobilienscout24.de.

Especially in big cities, it's really hard to find an apartment and thus landlords can actually be very picky. Tenent protection law in Germany is quite strict, which also makes landlords to be a bit defensive in tenent finding, because it's pretty difficult to kick people out. So it's not so uncommon that applicants voulentarily send out their personal information such as below, otherwise in many cases you won't even get a reponse from your email or your message.

1. Copy of Schufa or Mietschuldenfreiheitsbescheinigung : Schufa is a Germany used certification of your credit status which is very commonly used in rental contracts. Mietschuldenfreiheitsbescheinigung is a proof from your former landlord that you have nothing in debt to your landlord in terms of rent.
1. Copy of Personal ID
1. Proof of income or a working contract
1. A letter describing yourself in German

For many of the houses, pets are not allowed. (Citation needed) I think for cats they're slightly different from dogs that landlords cannot really prohibit you from having cats and you're also not obligated to notify them, but for dogs you cannot have them without landlord's concent. In the letters that I wrote, I wrote things such as introducing myself and the reason of staying, say that I don't smoke, don't have pets, do not play musical instruments and do not make parties at home and so on. These are the things that landlord tends to care about, so I usually include those in my introductory mail or an inquiry for an apartment. 

One tip that you can get ahead of other applicants in the competitive situations and you really want the apartment, you can try to tell them to pay X months of rents in advance such that although you might lack some documents (e.g. Schufa) due to not being in Germany for the past, they might be confident you will be paying the rent stabily as you're financially stable. 

#### Contacting the main tenant (Hauptmieter/*-in) for shared apartements

This section is for when you're looking for shared apartments such as in wg-gesucht or other facebook apartment finding 

Looking for a shared apartment is usually easier than renting a whole apartment as the main tenent (Hauptmieter/*-in) has already took the apartment from the landlord and they're taking the risks. Many cases, introducing yourself and asking for a apartment view should suffice.

### Apartment view (Besichtigungstermin)

You might do the apartment view alone, or it can be like an open visit for many people who're interested to save some time. Either way, you SHOULD bring the aforementioned documents with you to show how serious you are in your visit and hand them to the landlord or the real-estate agent who's acting on behalf.

### Apartment control and signing the rental contract.

TBD

### Alternatives

The process for looking an apartment can be quite stressful sometimes; and maybe you have money but not the time as your resource and you don't speak German which makes it worse. In that case, the best option for you would be contacting real estate agencies which can find apartments for you. They will get commissions for search (maybe in a scale of thousands of Euros upon signing the rental contract) depending on the apartment, but this will be much more easier as they'll do all the work for you and look for apartments which suits you.

## Register at your City ( Wohnungsanmeldung ) ℹ️

Once you have a rental contract 

## Open a bank Account ℹ️

## Get a health insurance ℹ️

## Get a residence permit ℹ️

Commit message:

Complete the TOC, Update housing part

Arriving_Germany.md, after:

# Arriving Germany

There is an exact sequence of steps that you need to take before you can do anything in Germany.

## Table Of Contents 
- Entering Germany ℹ️
- Get an apartment to live in ℹ️
  - Making Contact
    - Contacting the landlords for individual apartments
    - Contacting the main tenant (Hauptmieter/*-in) for shared apartements
  - Apartment view (Besichtigungstermin)
  - Apartment control and signing the rental contract.
  - Alternatives
  - Cancellation of the rental contract
- Register at your City ( Wohnungsanmeldung ) ℹ️
- Open a bank Account ℹ️
- Get a health insurance ℹ️
- Get a residence permit ℹ️

## Entering Germany ℹ️

Depending on whether you're eligible for 90 days of Schengen Visa or not, you'll need to get a visa to enter Germany. Every country is different in this matter, so I'll not cover how you'd get a permit to enter Germany.

## Get an apartment to live in ℹ️

> **Warning** Looking for an apartment is difficult, espcially when you don't speak the language. In some of the platforms for apartment-searching there are scammers of which trying to ask you for money transfers in advance without showing you the room saying that they're currently living abroad or something like that. DO NOT transfer money to these people, these are most likely scammers that you'd never be able to get that money back again.

Looking for an apartment is quite cumbersome in Germany especially in big major cities (Berlin, Cologne, Frankfurt, Hamburg, Munich), as the population is outgrowing the capacity. It should depend on your reason to moving into Germany, but if you're trying to look for a new job or trying to become a university student, you'll most likely have to move again for your job or for your studies. So my best recommendation is that you look for an accomodation where you consider temporary. There are cities which has some decent living price, yet still close to the big cities, so do your research to find a city that you want to live temporarily and move to the city once you've need. [Here's](https://www.studying-in-germany.org/cost-of-living-in-germany/) a site (2022) where you can have a grasp of the living costs in big Germany cities.

There are some web-platforms to find an accomodation.

1. [wg-gesucht.de](https://www.wg-gesucht.de/) : You can find shared apartments here. It can be both short or long term, students usually use this platform to find a new place to live in the city they're studying or in case they're doing internship in other cities. 
1. [immobilienscout24.de](https://www.immobilienscout24.de/) : A platform where apartments owned by companies or individual landlords are posted. Most popular option in Germany
1. [immowelt.de](https://www.immowelt.de/): Similar as immobilientscout24, but a different web site.
1. [ebay-kleinanzeigen](https://www.kleinanzeigen.de/): ebay-kleinanzeigen is a like a second-hand online shop where each individual sells their used products. You can also look for apartments under `Wohnung`.
1. some facebook groups to share local rents

Sadly, most of the people in these platforms only speak German, so if you don't have anybody to help, use an online translator to translate.

For more information about housing, see [housing in Germany](https://www.eu-gleichbehandlungsstelle.de/eugs-en/eu-citizens/information-center/housing)

### Making contact

#### Contacting the landlords for individual apartments

This section is for when you're looking for apartments for your own use such as in immobilienscout24.de.

Especially in big cities, it's really hard to find an apartment and thus landlords can actually be very picky. Tenent protection law in Germany is quite strict, which also makes landlords to be a bit defensive in tenent finding, because it's pretty difficult to kick people out. So it's not so uncommon that applicants voulentarily send out their personal information such as below, otherwise in many cases you won't even get a reponse from your email or your message.

1. Copy of Schufa or Mietschuldenfreiheitsbescheinigung : Schufa is a Germany used certification of your credit status which is very commonly used in rental contracts. Mietschuldenfreiheitsbescheinigung is a proof from your former landlord that you have nothing in debt to your landlord in terms of rent.
1. Copy of Personal ID
1. Proof of income or a working contract
1. A letter describing yourself in German

For many of the houses, pets are not allowed. (Citation needed) I think for cats they're slightly different from dogs that landlords cannot really prohibit you from having cats and you're also not obligated to notify them, but for dogs you cannot have them without landlord's concent. In the letters that I wrote, I wrote things such as introducing myself and the reason of staying, say that I don't smoke, don't have pets, do not play musical instruments and do not make parties at home and so on. These are the things that landlord tends to care about, so I usually include those in my introductory mail or an inquiry for an apartment. 

One tip that you can get ahead of other applicants in the competitive situations and you really want the apartment, you can try to tell them to pay X months of rents in advance such that although you might lack some documents (e.g. Schufa) due to not being in Germany for the past, they might be confident you will be paying the rent stabily as you're financially stable. 

#### Contacting the main tenant (Hauptmieter/*-in) for shared apartements

This section is for when you're looking for shared apartments such as in wg-gesucht or other facebook apartment finding 

Looking for a shared apartment is usually easier than renting a whole apartment as the main tenent (Hauptmieter/*-in) has already took the apartment from the landlord and they're taking the risks. Many cases, introducing yourself and asking for a apartment view should suffice.

### Apartment view (Besichtigungstermin)

You might do the apartment view alone, or it can be like an open visit for many people who're interested to save some time. Either way, you SHOULD bring the aforementioned documents with you to show how serious you are in your visit and hand them to the landlord or the real-estate agent who's acting on behalf.

### Apartment control and signing the rental contract.

On the day of signing the rental contract, you usually meet at your new apartment and do something called hand over protocol ([Übergabeprotokoll](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wohnungs%C3%BCbergabeprotokoll))

### Alternatives

The process for looking an apartment can be quite stressful sometimes; and maybe you have money but not the time as your resource and you don't speak German which makes it worse. In that case, the best option for you would be contacting real estate agencies which can find apartments for you. They will get commissions for search (maybe in a scale of thousands of Euros upon signing the rental contract) depending on the apartment, but this will be much more easier as they'll do all the work for you and look for apartments which suits you.

Other alternatives for looking apartments can be online communities using your own language. If you come from a country which has a decent number of migrants in Germany, you'll most likely find a corresponding online community which also occasionally have some feature to rent out apartments to people. Sometimes its easier to find apartment in those because the competetition is less severe, and you'll have less problems with communication.

### Cancellation of the rental contract

It might not be explicit in the rental contract, but it is (Citation needed) assumed by the law that there is a 3 month of notice period of cancellation of your rental contract. Always keep in mind this period if you're trying to move to another city or an apartment, otherwise you'll have to pay for the remaining notice period if you move out earlier. To avoid this on a quick moveout, you can look for a next tenent ([NachMieter](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nachmieter)), but whether your landlord accepts this new person or not is totally up to their decision, and if they don't you'll still have to pay.

## Register at your City ( Wohnungsanmeldung ) ℹ️

Once you have a rental contract you now can finally register to a city. You can search for "Wohnungsanmeldung" + <name of the city your apartment is present> in google to find a website which you can learn about . In bigger cities, the appointment is almost always fully booked out, 

## Open a bank Account ℹ️

For non-online banks, you are required to have an registered 

## Get a health insurance ℹ️

## Get a residence permit ℹ️
