Fitting_In_Germany.md, before:

# How do I know if I fit well in Germany? :thinking:

All of the following sections are discussing about something about a subjective matter. Although I'm trying to be genuine on what I write down, everyone's experience is unique and my reference point is what I had exprienced in South Korea, thus cannot represent what everyone would feel when you arrive, as you would feel different for everything, and the matter only is how different your experience or feeling should be. So please try to take what I wrote down here with a grain of salt here. 

I have seem people who lived in their own countries for most of their lives (including me) tend not to understand the difference between cultures and systems before they actually experienced it, so fantasizing the life in other countries might be a risk that you might not want to take. But even so, I'll still try to be as subjective as I can be 🙂

## Weather in Germany :thinking:

TBD

## Traveling to nearby countries :thinking:

TBD

## Germanic culture :thinking:

TBD

## Strong labor protection laws and less working hours :thinking:

TBD

## Bureaucracy in Germany :thinking:

TBD

## High income tax :thinking:
TBD

## Healthcare system :thinking:

TBD

## Raising children :thinking:

TBD

## Acceptance towards diversity :thinking:

TBD

## Racism in Germany :thinking:

TBD

Commit message:

Update weather in germany section

Fitting_In_Germany.md, after:

# How do I know if I fit well in Germany? :thinking:

All of the following sections are discussing about something about a subjective matter. Although I'm trying to be genuine on what I write down, everyone's experience is unique and my reference point is what I had exprienced in South Korea, thus cannot represent what everyone would feel when you arrive, as you would feel different for everything, and the matter only is how different your experience or feeling should be. So please try to take what I wrote down here with a grain of salt here. 

I have seem people who lived in their own countries for most of their lives (including me) tend not to understand the difference between cultures and systems before they actually experienced it, so fantasizing the life in other countries might be a risk that you might not want to take. But even so, I'll still try to be as subjective as I can be 🙂

## Weather in Germany :thinking:

Depends on your percention of weather, but I haven't seen much people that says they like German weather. There's a saying in German : "Es gibt kein schlechtes Wetter nur schlechte Kleidung" meaning that there's no bad weather, and only exists the unfitting outfit. I've lived in a country with clear sky most of the year, and when it rains it pours, and in winter it's freezing cold but very dry. I've never understood the concept of appreciating the sun before moving to Germany, as the sun was something that can be taken as granted. 

But after living in Germany for some years, I've changed as well. I started to appreciate the sun, go out and stay under the sun when I have the chance. When I was in the first year living in Berlin, I was so surprised that people just go out and tan under the sun nakid. I've lived in West, North east, and South of Germany but in those different regions, one thing common is that you will always appreciate sun to some degree. But it's not really pouring when it's raining, it's mostly cloudly and drizzling most of the time. 

Over the year the temperature is usually between -5 ~ 32 degrees, and there were few Summer which went really hot. You usually wouldn't find air conditioners in Germany because it isn't really that hot in Summer, but also the electicity is quite expensive and also people do care a lot about sustainable life here.

## Traveling to nearby countries :thinking:

TBD

## Germanic culture :thinking:

TBD

## Strong labor protection laws and less working hours :thinking:

TBD

## Bureaucracy in Germany :thinking:

TBD

## High income tax :thinking:
TBD

## Healthcare system :thinking:

TBD

## Raising children :thinking:

TBD

## Acceptance towards diversity :thinking:

TBD

## Racism in Germany :thinking:

TBD
